the place of black people in british
history is sometimes thought of
as a story that begins with the arrival
of the windrush in reality the windrush
is just
one chapter in a much longer history
black people have been living in this
country
for centuries and the story of the black
presence
in the united kingdom goes back all the
way to roman times
this is alt history the history that you
don't learn at school
when i was 16 i went into a book shop
and i bought
this book staying power by peter fryer
and to
black british people of my generation
this
was the most important book in the world
because what it did was it showed us
that we
weren't new arrivals but that we were
part of a longer
deeper history that went back centuries
because we're not telling key moments in
british history
whole aspects of the story of britain
are simply being left out of the picture
and i think
it's time that changed
[Music]
that phrase black british that we're
really used to today
i never heard that when i was growing up
to be black and to be british
well they were two separate things you
couldn't really be both to be black
was not really to be british and it was
the history
it was books like staying power by peter
fryer that showed me that they'd always
been black british people
black british history is so diverse it's
just kind of a shame
that at a young age you can't really
participate and celebrate in your
identity how can you not want to learn
about your past because you can't
go forward without understanding your
past when i talk to young black people
what they tell me
is that they are as desperate as i was
when i was their age
to learn more about the longer history
of the black presence in britain and
that that history is still
not being taught to them at school
[Music]
when it came to learning about black
history was mainly pumped within a month
of something that should have been a
year consistently um
and it was kind of ranging from mary
sequel
to nelson mandela martin luther king
what a lot of people are taught at
school
are the biographies of individual black
people and there's lots of good stuff
that comes out of that it's
really great that kids now learn about
mary seacole and they will learn about
walter told that's great and i've got a
problem with it but if you only do that
what you find is you just create these
isolated black characters
and what you don't learn about are the
forces that led
britain to interact with africa
interact with africans you don't learn
about just
how important the sugar slavery economy
was
in the 17th and 18th and early 19th
centuries we don't learn
that britain's relationship with the
united states economic relationship
after the american war of independence
and right up to the civil war is
founded on cotton and that cotton is
produced by african-americans
enslaved african-americans we're kind of
told in a way that these things didn't
happen in the uk and we're told that
certain things like this happened within
america and you know it wasn't on our
soil and we we treated black people
um great and well and we provided all
these things for them when in reality
there was there was
no difference it's great that we learned
today about
the biographies of individual black
figures from the past and those stories
were important to me when i was growing
up but what we seem still to neglect
are exploring other issues things like
the development of racial thinking in
the 18th and 19th centuries or
the centrality of slavery to the british
economy
black history is more than just
biographies
it is fundamental to understanding
british history because it is a
fundamental part
of british history i don't know if
this whole exclusionary history is like
a nod to empire laziness
or they just don't really care about
black people people of color
working class or women in general i just
don't know
what the new science is proving is that
there were
afro-romans living in britain there are
people who find it
challenging even threatening that black
people
have been in britain since roman times
there are people
who feel the need when this is discussed
online
to go on twitter to go on social media
and discredit these ideas
there are people who would rather deny
the facts
than confront the quite simple
uncontroversial in my view reality
is that britain was part of the roman
empire and the roman empire was
multiracial
one of the best examples is the ivory
bangle lady
she was a middle-class afro-roman living
in fourth century york
we know she was african because of the
test that's been done on her remains
and because among her possessions was a
bracelet
made of african ivory
john blank was a trumpeter in the court
of the tudors in the court
of henry viii and he is the first black
briton
for whom we have not just a name and
evidence from the archives
we have his picture he appears on a
document called the 1511
westminster tournament role he is the
first black briton
whose name we can give a face to that
makes him really special
among the documents that tell us
something of the life of john blank
is a petition that he had written
demanding
a pay rise now he's sending this
petition to his boss
to henry viii what that tells us
is that this is somebody who values
themselves this is somebody
who understands that their skills are
worth something
and he's willing to stick his neck out
and demand
a pay rise from henry viii and he gets
his payrolls
when i was at school i was taught about
the act of abolition that britain freed
the slaves what i wasn't told
was that britain also compensated the
slave owners
to the tune 20 million pounds now that's
around 17 billion pounds
today slavery wasn't just abolished the
slave owners
were compensated for their loss of
property human property there was
another
part of the act of abolition that i
didn't learn at school
what i wasn't taught was that the former
slaves weren't freed immediately
they were made to work 45 hours a week
for the next four to six years for their
former owner
in a system that was called
apprenticeship
there is a specific moment in british
history that i'm thinking about
this year we've marked lots of centenary
anniversaries from
1914 to 1918 but there is
another set of stories about another
year
a year in which black soldiers returned
from fighting
but were not included in the victory
parades
a year of race riots a year in which a
black man
was lynched on the streets of a british
city
all of that happened in the forgotten
year of 1919.
[Music]
you